# Disposable iterators

* **Type**: Design proposal
* **Author**: Andrey Breslav
* **Contributors**: Vladimir Reshetnikov, Stanislav Erokhin
* **Status**: Under consideration
* **Prototype**: Not started  

## Feedback 

Discussion of this proposal is held in [this issue](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlin-coroutines/issues/10).

## Synopsis

An iterator (for example, one generated by a coroutine) may iterate over a file or some other disposable resource. If the iteration completes normally (i.e. by reaching the last item), the iterator can dispose the underlying resource, but if
 
  - an exception occurs during one of the iterations,
  - `break`, `continue` or `return` cause early termination of the loop,
  
  the resource will never be disposed.
   
To overcome this issue, C# has all `for`-loops wrapped in `try`/`finally`, where the `finally` block checks whether the iterator implements `IDisposable` and if so, calls the `Dispose()` method.
    
Here we propose the same for Kotlin.
    
## References

- Description: [Handling `finally` blocks in Kotlin coroutines](kotlin-coroutines-informal.md#handling-finally-blocks)
- Issue #1: [Handling of `finally` blocks](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlin-coroutines/issues/1)
- Issue #9: [Allow suspension points in `finally` blocks?](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlin-coroutines/issues/9)
- C# [Iterator block implementation details: auto-generated state machines](http://csharpindepth.com/Articles/Chapter6/IteratorBlockImplementation.aspx)

## Implementation

The idea is to wrap every `for`-loop that uses an iterator into a `try`/`finally`. The handler in the `finally` block is calling the following function (to be added to `kotlin-runtime`):
 
``` kotlin
internal fun disposeIfNeeded(obj: Any?) {
    if (obj is Disposable) {
        obj.dispose()
    }
}
```

The aforementioned `Disposable` interface should be added to `kotlin-runtime` as follows:

``` kotlin
package kotlin

public interface Disposable {
    fun dispose()
}
```

The Standard Library code should be revised and any iteration utilities there that iterate without using `for`-loops must be updated to provide the same semantics.

## JVM costs

Apart from adding these two items to `kotlin-runtime` this results in generating extra byte code instructions for every `for`-loop that uses an iterator (note that loops that enumerate number ranges don't use iterators most of the time). This will amount to a minimum of 6 instructions per `for`-loop (+ `TRYCATCHBLOCK` entries in the [Code Attribute](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se7/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.7.3)). To be precise, this amounts to two instructions per copy of the `finally` block): 
```
    ALOAD 1        # iterator
    INVOKESTATIC disposeIfNeeded(Ljava/lang/Object;)V
```

There are at least two copies of the `finally` block: one for normal termination, and another for exceptional termination. An extra copy is generated for each exit point, such as `break`, `continue` and `return` inside the loop.

Another two instructions need to be added for the implicit `catch` block (which has to be generated to implement the `try`/`finally` semantics): one to jump over the `catch` block in case of normal termination, another — to rethrow the exception in the `catch` block.

Here's the byte code for teh simplest case: 
 
```
    ALOAD 0  ; iterable
    INVOKEINTERFACE java/lang/Iterable.iterator ()Ljava/util/Iterator;
    ASTORE 2 ; tmp_iterator
    
   START_TRY:
   LOOP:
    ALOAD 2  ; tmp_iterator
    INVOKEINTERFACE java/util/Iterator.hasNext ()Z
    IFEQ FINALLY
    
    ALOAD 2  ; tmp_iterator 
    INVOKEINTERFACE java/util/Iterator.next ()Ljava/lang/Object;
    ASTORE 1 ; loop_variable
    
    // loop body
    // ...
    
    GOTO LOOP
    
   FINALLY:
    ALOAD 2  ; tmp_iterator                                ; overhead
    INVOKESTATIC disposeIfNeeded (Ljava/lang/Object;)V     ; overhead
                                                           ; overhead
    GOTO AFTER_CATCH
   
   CATCH:
    ALOAD 2  ; tmp_iterator                                ; overhead
    INVOKESTATIC disposeIfNeeded (Ljava/lang/Object;)V     ; overhead
    
    ATHROW                                                 ; overhead
    
   AFTER_CATCH:
    // code after the loop
    // ...
``` 

## Compatibility concerns

The code compiled with any pre-1.1 will run against the new library, but the `for`-loops there won't be disposing their iterators. This is not exactly a binary incompatibility: all code will keep working as before, but old clients for the new code will be unprepared, and won't hold their part of the deal (that is expected by the new code).
 
> A minor and incomplete mitigation for this will be having the iterators dispose themselves when teh iteration completes normally, i.e. when `hasNext()` returns `false` for the first time. This won't help the case of an exceptions or early termination of a loop, though. 

If we are ready to live with this, i.e. warn the users to recompile their old code, some new concerns arise:
- the recompiled code will depend on the new `kotlin-runtime`, 
- recompiling the old code with Kotlin 1.1 may be undesirable for setup/compiler changes reasons.

This leads to thinking of adding this feature as a minimal change to Kotlin 1.0.X (under a flag, probably), and making it emit code that is tolerant to the old runtime (e.g. doesn't fail if `disposeIfNeeded()` or `Disposable` are missing).
 
The possible options here are:
- Use `Class.forName` to check for presense of `Disposable` (do nothing if it's not present),
- Catch `NoSuchMethodError` around the call to `disposeIfNeeded()` and swallow it.

Neither of these approaches will stop ProGuard from complaining.

Both these approaches are a bit costly when applied straightforwardly:
- too many instructions,
- time-consuming operations (class lookup or filling the stack trace for an error).
 
We can have fewer instructions by emitting a method that encapsulates this logic into 
- each module (troublesome for incremental compilation),
- each file (more code).

We can mitigate time costs by caching the results: having a static flag for either whether `Disposable` is present, or `disposeIfNeeded()`.

## JS costs

TODO

Looks like an explicit `try`/`finally` has be generated around `for`-loops. 

## Arguments against this proposal

- Maybe the compatibility issues are prohibitive for this feature?
- Other ways of iterating, that do not use `for`-loops, won't become disposable-aware through this proposal
- This is introducing a whole new concept of disposability into the ecosystem 